(Doc) ILM Force Merge not on HDD and happens on hosting node not current phase tier (#130280)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/elasticsearch/index-lifecycle-actions/ilm-forcemerge.md

Phases allowed: hot, warm.

[Force merges](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-indices-forcemerge) the index into the specified maximum number of [segments](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-indices-segments). This operation is best effort. For example, shards that are relocating during a `forcemerge` will not be merged.

To use the `forcemerge` action in the `hot` phase, the `rollover` action **must** be present. If no rollover action is configured, {{ilm-init}} will reject the policy.

:::::{admonition} Performance considerations
:name: ilm-forcemerge-performance

Force merge is a resource-intensive operation. If too many force merges are triggered at once, it can negatively impact your cluster. For example, this can happen when you 

> * modify an existing {{ilm-init}} policy's phase `min_age` such that indices trigger into force-merging phase faster.

Reviewer: * modify an {{ilm-init}} policy to lower the [`min_age`](./ilm-rollover.md#ilm-rollover-options) for one or more phases, causing indices to trigger the force merge at a faster rate.

> * modify an existing {{ilm-init}} policy's phase `min_age` such that indices trigger into force-merging phase faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* modify an {{ilm-init}} policy to lower the [`min_age`](./ilm-rollover.md#ilm-rollover-options) for one or more phases, causing indices to trigger the force merge at a faster rate.
```

Reviewer: Ah, okay. Let's not use the link then. I thought these were the same setting.

> * apply an {{ilm-init}} policy that includes a force merge action to existing indices. If they meet the `min_age` criteria, they can immediately proceed through multiple actions. You can prevent this by increasing the `min_age` or setting `index.lifecycle.origination_date` to change how the index age is calculated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* apply an {{ilm-init}} policy that includes a force merge action to existing indices. If the indices meet the `min_age` criteria, they can immediately proceed through multiple actions. You can prevent this by increasing the `min_age` or setting `index.lifecycle.origination_date` to change how the index age is calculated.
```

* run the [{{ilm-init}} Move Step API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-ilm-move-to-step) against multiple indices.

If you experience a force merge task queue backlog, you might need to increase the size of the force merge threadpool so indices can be force merged in parallel. To do this, configure the `thread_pool.force_merge.size` [cluster setting](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cluster-get-settings). This is considered an expert setting override as this can have cascading performance impacts. Monitor cluster performance and increment the size of the thread pool slowly to reduce the backlog.

> Force merging will be performed by the node hosting the shard. The [node's role](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles#data-node-role) frequently is equal to the [data tier](https://www.elastic.co/docs/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers) of the {{ilm-init}}'s phase of the index, but this is not guaranteed. For example, a forcemerge in the 

Author: It's poor phrasing my side sorry. I was trying to leave the door open because (a) users can disable ILM Migrate (and can use ILM Allocate to set allocation customizations on top) & (B) Searchable Snapshots merge on the phase-before's data tier; both'd nullify this earlier belief that force merge happens on phase's data tiers. But "is not guaranteed" is poor phrasing my part although nothing better comes to mind. Do you have any suggestions by chance?

> Force merging will be performed by the node hosting the shard. The [node's role](https://www.elastic.co/docs/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles#data-node-role) frequently is equal to the [data tier](https://www.elastic.co/docs/manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers) of the {{ilm-init}}'s phase of the index, but this is not guaranteed. For example, a forcemerge in the 

Reviewer: Yup! I'd suggest `but this is not guaranteed.` → `but you may choose to adjust this behavior.` 

I've added a [suggestion](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/130280/files#r2175981766) for that change.

Phases allowed: hot, warm.

[Force merges](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-indices-forcemerge) the index into the specified maximum number of [segments](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-indices-segments). This operation is performed on a best effort basis. For example, shards that are relocating during a `forcemerge` will not be merged.

To use the `forcemerge` action in the `hot` phase, the `rollover` action **must** be present. If no rollover action is configured, {{ilm-init}} will reject the policy.

:::::{admonition} Performance considerations
:name: ilm-forcemerge-performance

Force merge is a resource-intensive operation. If too many force merges are triggered at once, it can negatively impact your cluster. For example, this can happen when you 

> * modify an existing {{ilm-init}} policy's phase `min_age` such that indices trigger into force-merging phase faster.

Reviewer 2: Small grammar nit: I liked David's suggestion (but I agree with Stef about not adding a link)
```suggestion
* modify an existing {{ilm-init}} policy's phase `min_age`, causing indices to trigger the force merge at a faster rate.
```

* apply an {{ilm-init}} policy that includes a force merge action to existing indices. If the indices meet the `min_age` criteria, they can immediately proceed through multiple actions. You can prevent this by increasing the `min_age` or setting `index.lifecycle.origination_date` to change how the index age is calculated.
* run the [{{ilm-init}} Move Step API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-ilm-move-to-step) against multiple indices.

> If you experience a force merge task queue backlog, you might need to increase the size of the force merge threadpool so indices can be force merged in parallel. To do this, configure the `thread_pool.force_merge.size` [cluster setting](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cluster-get-settings). 

Reviewer 2: Tiny nit: can you remove the trailing whitespace?
```suggestion
If you experience a force merge task queue backlog, you might need to increase the size of the force merge threadpool so indices can be force merged in parallel. To do this, configure the `thread_pool.force_merge.size` [cluster setting](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cluster-get-settings).
```

::::{important}
Note that `thread_pool.force_merge.size` is an advanced setting. Adjusting it can cause cascading performance impacts. Monitor cluster performance and increment the size of the thread pool slowly to reduce the backlog.
::::

> Force merging will be performed by the node hosting the shard. The [node's role](docs-content://deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-settings.md#node-roles) frequently matches the [data tier](docs-content://manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md) of the {{ilm-init}}'s phase of the index, you may choose to adjust this behavior. For example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Force merging will be performed by the node hosting the shard. The [node's role](docs-content://deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#set-node-roles) frequently matches the [data tier](docs-content://manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md) of the {{ilm-init}}'s phase of the index, you may choose to adjust this behavior. For example: 
```
This should fix the broken link. 🤞

> Force merging will be performed by the node hosting the shard. The [node's role](docs-content://deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/clusters-nodes-shards/node-roles.md#set-node-roles) frequently matches the [data tier](docs-content://manage-data/lifecycle/data-tiers.md) of the {{ilm-init}}'s phase of the index, you may choose to adjust this behavior. For example: 

Reviewer 2: > The node's role frequently matches the data tier of the ILM's phase of the index, you may choose to adjust this behavior.

I'm having trouble understanding this sentence, but maybe it's just me. Could you explain what you mean?

Author: Yeah @kilfoyle and I tried to has this out but I'm not sure I got it across the line, sorry.

The needed fix from current doc: force merges do not happen on the ilm phase's node tier. They happen on the node hosting the shard, this specifically is different when you use searchable snapshots (e.g. hot>frozen merges on hot inside `phase/action/step: frozen/searchable_snapshot/forcemerge`). 

I've debated just removing `you may choose to adjust this behavior`. David & I discussed it as relating to disabling ILM Migrate (and using node attribute allocation filters).

* A force merge in the `hot` phase will use hot nodes. Merges may be faster on this potentially higher performance hardware but may have the tradeoff of impacting ingestion. 
* A force merge in the `warm` phase will use warm nodes. Merges may take longer to perform on potentially lower performance hardware but will avoid impacting ingestion in the `hot` tier.

> * A force merge in the `cold` or `frozen` phase [{{ilm-init}} Searchable Snapshots](./ilm-searchable-snapshot) using `force_merge_index` happens on the preceeding data tier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A force merge in the `cold` or `frozen` phase [{{ilm-init}} Searchable Snapshots](./ilm-searchable-snapshot.md) using `force_merge_index` happens on the preceeding data tier.
```

> * A force merge in the `cold` or `frozen` phase [{{ilm-init}} Searchable Snapshots](./ilm-searchable-snapshot.md) using `force_merge_index` happens on the preceeding data tier.

Reviewer 2: > A force merge in the cold or frozen phase ILM Searchable Snapshots using force_merge_index happens on the preceeding data tier.

- It should be `preceding` instead of `preceeding`
- The structure of this sentence looks a bit confusing to me; especially the `ILM Searchable Snapshots using force_merge_index` part. Could you rewrite it (or explain what you're trying to say)?

Author: Not necessarily recommending as final state but trying to reword to better explain target idea
```suggestion
*  [{{ilm-init}} Searchable Snapshot](./ilm-searchable-snapshot.md) performance is dependant upon the shard having been force merged, so by default this ILM action will enable `force_merge_index`. This will trigger force merges in the preceding node data tier for `cold` and `frozen` phases.
```

This again is trying to fix the wrong idea currently in doc that force merges happen on ilm phase's data tier. Vs [for searchable snapshots](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/index-lifecycle-actions/ilm-searchable-snapshot#ilm-searchable-snapshot-options) its the preceding, this paragraph: 

<img width="441" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bd34eb81-9296-4ea3-a19f-fa14f4bf2c04" />
